---
title: "Training, practice and discipline"
date: "2022-07-27"
---
#### Prelude
During my entire youth, and also the early parts of my adulthoods, I have always been learning martial arts.  
It started out with Judo, Karate, Jujutsu, Kung-fu, and I ended up settling with Kendo, Iaido and Jodo, 
which are martial arts surrounding the Japanese sword, the Katana.  
I practiced it well into my 20s, and have learned several life lessons that I take with me to this day.

The structure of a Kendo practice is divided into roughly 3 parts:
1. *Kihon* - Practicing basic, familiar, techniques.
1. *Waza* - Learning and practicing new, advanced, techniques.
1. *Keiko* - Free-form fights, in which the goal is to apply the newly learnt techniques.

Aside from practice, there are also *Shiai* - Competitions that are judged and scored, 
in which you need to use all the skills that you've acquired to win.

The way I've come to see software development is a similar way to Kendo, 
in which coming to work and developing production code is the equivalent of *Shiai* - 
I am coming to display my skills that I've mastered.

Looking at software development in that way, means that in order to succeed in *Shiai*, 
I need to both practice and sharpen my basics, and constantly learn new skills.

#### Practicing Basics
It is never a bad idea to practice familiar concepts - Maybe it's whiteboard questions, 
maybe it's creating a simle CRUD RESTful API, maybe it's something else - but whatever it is, 
practicing your basics is important in software development, just as it is important in martial 
arts, sports, cooking, and every other skill.

Learning new skills is reliant on firm understanding of the techniques that come before, so make 
sure you do exercises to keep your basics fresh in your mind. Even if it doesn't seem like it, 
you are using basic skills and techniques all the time.

#### Training New Skills
During a Kendo competition, there is no time for a practitioner to try and master new techniques, 
even if it's something they already saw or tried once. When you are in a competition, you are there 
to display your mastery.

The same is true for software development, even if you see a cool new framework, or a new way to 
apply your logic, this is not the time and place. This is why you need to make time outside of work 
to both discover these new skills, and to train using them, so that when the time comes, you can 
know when they are viable, and be able to use them in production effortlessly.

#### Keeping the Discipline
Using your free time to do more work can seem daunting. I, too, enjoy resting and diffusing my mind 
during that time. However, taking another hour or two a day to practice and learn is cruicla in order 
to keep growing as a developer. And in software development, I believe that not growing, is shrinking.

Keeping that in mind, having the discipline to setting some time aside to practice is essential.  
A Kendo practitioner won't win in tournaments without practice, and a software developer won't deliver 
their best code without it, either.

-- Ido

