---
title: "Ownerless Features"
date: "2023-05-08"
---
#### Ownership Delegation
How often has it happened to you at work that you wrote some piece of code and now you're its forever 
maintainer? And the longer you work in a place, the more of these obscure methods, classes, and pieces 
of code that whenever someone has a bug or a question that relates to it, they come to you.

How many times, and be honest with yourself here, have you said something along the lines of, 
"Oh, this is David's code, you better ask them about it"? And eventually when David gets asked, they 
need to dive into the code just the same as you would have. Who remembers their code from 9 months ago?

Some people really love the concept of *Feature Owners*. You wrote some code, so now you are its owner, 
you know what you did, and why you did it. And every time it will be fastest for you to maintain it. 
I, however, really dislike it.

#### Knowledge Pits
The concept of feature owners might work well when the team structure is static and unchanging. 
John Doe works at the Company™ for a long time, and can easily maintain his code. 
He probably already was approached about a piece of code so many times, he remembers it by heart. 
But what happens when Mr. Doe leaves the Company™? He leaves behind him a huge knowledge pit, that no 
one is really capable of filling.

This can also happens when a code is complex (More on complex code in the future), without having Mr. 
Doe leaving. But he will just be constantly approached about the code, the architecture, and everything 
in between. His expertise will be needed in any and all future features that depends on the code that 
he wrote and the decisions he made.

I happened to be that guy, and also be part of teams that had that guy and I was forced to constantly 
reach out to them in order to understand what is going on. It's not a very good feeling on either 
sides, and I think it hampers growth of both the company, the product, and the professional development 
of all individuals involved.

#### The Solution
Complex code and architecture is always the #1 reason for having these knowledge pits, and as the Zen 
of Python says "Simple is better than complex." So the obvious and annoying response would be to first 
of all, write simple code! If I may throw out two quotes in the same paragraph, as Brian W. Kernighan 
said "if you write the code as cleverly as possible, you are, by definition, not smart enough to debug it."

Writing simple code isn't always enough. Code can be very clear as to how it's doing something, 
but not why the decision to do it this way. And surely not the architectural research that has gone 
on in order to arrive at this construct. And thus the second obvious and annoying response - document 
your code!

Documentation always comes as an afterthought, or even neglected altogether, but it's a powerful tool 
that makes a good codebase into a great codebase. You can document why you chose using SQS over RabbitMQ, 
or why using Dijkstra's algorithm gives the best performance in a niche case. These are decisions that 
are made once in a feature's lifetime, and are easily forgotten as time goes on. Having these stuff 
written down will immortalize them and make them accessible to others.

#### The location
Now, not all documentation is good documentation. There's always some Wiki or some Confluence page 
that contains "all relevant information," but in reality it's outdated, irrelevant, or plain wrong. 
I honestly think that Wiki pages and the likes are where documentation goes to die.

Where should you put the invaluable documentation, then? Why not put it right there next to the code? 
You can use `docstrings` in Python, you can put a README.md in each module of your project, and you can 
even link from there to external resources in case you need a fancier way to display information.

With this approach, gone are the days that someone needs someone else to explain something, or to 
give the relevant link to the Wiki. All of your information, all of your thoughts during designing a
feature and all of the limitations that forced you to do something a certain way, it's all right next 
to your code that does it. There are no more feature owners, but every member of the team can contribute 
just as much as the next one.

-- Ido
