---
title: "The case for TDD"
date: "2022-09-01"
---
#### Philosophy
I am a big believer of TDD, and although I only came to really understand TDD lately and honestly, 
it baffles me why it took me so long to understand that. Perhaps it's because they way software 
development is taught that tests are never the focus, and code resilience is not even mentioned.

My philosophy since coming to understand TDD, is that since my code's behavior is always tested, 
and is always resilient to changes and refactors, I can make those fearlessly. I can deploy to 
production on Friday. And I am never afraid that something will break unexpectedly - If it does, 
I will immediately know.

#### The Arguments
- TDD reduces velocity

I have a personal beef with this statement. Even the people who are pro-TDD often argue that, 
"Yeah, it does at first, but then it's faster!" - No! TDD increases velocity immediately, once 
your code is reliable and resilient since day 0, your velocity will increase significantly, your 
QA engineers will seldom finds bugs, your code's behavior will always be expected, and you will 
be able to release features much, MUCH, quicker.

- Getting to 100% coverage doesn't guarantee everything is tested

This argument is actually very true, but it doesn't contradict TDD. Getting your unit test suite 
test every part of the code doesn't mean that these tests are good, nor do they reflect all edge 
cases. Your tests need to follow the requirements for the piece of software you are writing, otherwise, 
you're just trying to get a 100% achievement without any meaning. A piece of code may, and usually should, 
be tested by several different tests that validate different behaviors.

- TDD doesn't reflect the users' needs

Same as the previous point - this is only true if you're not practicing TDD currectly. If the 
product's requirements are being gathered from users, and reflect all their needs, then it shouldn't 
be a problem. Every requirement should be reflected in at least one test, and if a requirement can't be 
tested - then it means it's too broad. If the requirements are not clear, then TDD wouldn't reflect the 
needs of the user, but then again, every other methodology will miss as well. Requirements should be 
collected and understood in depth before writing any line of code, no methodology will change that.

#### The Contract
As I mentioned perviously, tests are the best documentation for a piece of code you can have. 
I've come to like to word contract to represent that. For example, if you have the following piece of code:
```py
def sum_of_nums(n):
    s = 0
    for i in range(n):
        s+= i
    return s
```
And then the following test:
```py
def test_of_of_nums():
    assert sum_of_nums(1) == 0
    assert sum_of_nums(2) == 1
    assert sum_of_nums(5) == 10
    assert sum_of_nums(10) == 45
    assert sum_of_nums(100) == 4950
```
Then, it is very easy to understand what is the expected output of the function, and even if we go 
and refactor it, we know what is the expected behavior, and we know that it will be resilient. 
Once we go and improve the performance by using maths:
```py
def sum_of_nums(n):
    return (n * (n - 1)) // 2
```
We can know that our formula is right, since the tests will alert us in case we've made any error.

#### Continuous Testing
My last point, which might seem a bit unrelated to TDD, is more about a proper development cycle, 
but it's still very much relevant to strengthening your code's resilience. Your codebase should be 
tested on every change you make, every commit, every push. If you're not doing that, then the tests 
are meaningless. You want to be informed ASAP once something makes the tests fail.

Another thing that people often confused about this approach, is that they say their testing suite 
is too extensive for running it so often - this usually means that their tests are not written in a 
way that tests code behaviour, but something broader. The mantra should always be to fail fast.

The feedback loop of TDD is very, very, fast - You should spot breaking changes immediately, if you're 
not, then you need to refactor your tests or your testing approach, and make sure you will be 
alerted ASAP, then you can be truly fearless.

-- Ido
